all right let's now formalize the
concept of backward induction
we started this week's class with the
example of the birthday party and we've
seen that the solution that we obtained
through backward induction nicely
corresponds to higher order knowledge of
rationality among the players
if we're the last one to act in a game
tree then we know what payoffs we're
going to get and by rationality we have
to choose whichever action maximizes our
utility
and if other players know that we are
rational they can take that into account
and then maximize their own utility
given that we will act rationally behind
them
now let's see how we can formalize this
concept
so if we are given an arbitrary game
tree then
the way we would solve for the solution
right is backwards through the tree
um we look at all the last decisions
that the players make
and here if a player is willing to
choose either action this means they
have to be indifferent between the two
and then we can go backwards through the
tree and you would obtain some solution
given by backward induction
now
to define the concept formally
it's actually better to not
define it through an iterative procedure
because that would be quite difficult to
work with
afterwards
but well
we can now say something about the
solution that we obtained the solution
that we obtained through backward
induction well
at any node in the tree
the active player
acts optimally by taking into account
that
the players after him or her
also act optimally
now in the background induction solution
we know that the continuation strategy
profile
after
node xa
is optimal
so we denote by sigma
and
vertical bar xa we denote the
continuation strategy profile after some
node and in the solution this is already
optimal
now
in order to
describe optimality at some node x
we need to be able to aggregate the
utilities in this
subset of nodes that can be reached from
x
and so we need to know what
the distribution
induced by the continuation strategy
profile is
now
what i've shown here in the tree is sort
of
the possible support of all backward
induction solution in this game
and
let's now pick
um
some
distribution chosen by the players
and
then see how should we how should the
induced distribution be
over this set
of nodes that can be reached from x
well
given that that the play that play has
already arrived at x we know that from x
we cannot reach any node outside
of this set here
and we know that
node x
is reached with probability one because
we see it right we are at x we observe
that
game has arrived here
and so
what we do is we essentially compute
the conditional distribution
given that x has been reached
so it just means that everything that
cannot be reached anymore will have
probability 0 of being reached
and
node x has probability 1 and then
starting from x we define
um
we multiply the probabilities of each
edge again
and this is formalized
in this definition here
so we start at any node in a singleton
information set
and then we look at instead of all nodes
that can be reached from x
and
we call this
the continuation game starting at x
and so here
the actions the
the information sets the utilities are
simply restricted to this sub tree here
the continuation strategy profile is
also just the restriction of
a strategy profile in the entire game to
this subtree
and
it's
all the decisions are exactly the same
it's just the continuation strategy
profile is only defined
on the subtree
then
the induced probability measure is
defined in the same way except that we
start now at
node x node x is probability one and
then we multiply
the edges
and
this is how players can aggregate the
payoffs
at any node x in the tree
so the idea is essentially we just
restrict attention to a smaller part of
the tree and then we define everything
in the part in the same way that we did
it for the entire game
now
two comments are in order about this
definition here
so
the idea is yeah we
we define it in the same way that we did
in the entire game
if this is a node that is on the path so
a node that is reached with positive
probability
then this distribution defined here is
identical to the conditional
distribution
but this conditional distribution would
not be defined off the path right if
the probability of reaching some node x
is zero then we cannot
use bayes rule to define a conditional
distribution but
the definition on the previous slide is
well defined also in this case
and this is important because
in many cases a best response is a pure
strategy and
in that case
many
many nodes are of the path and here is
an example where all the nodes are off
the path except the initial node
and so
we wouldn't be able to
to
[Music]
use bayes rule on the rest of the tree
here
then
on the previous slide we've restricted
attention to
two continuation games starting in a
singleton information set and the reason
why it's not at all straightforward to
extend it to non-singleton information
set
is
let's say if we look at the
let's call the continuation game
starting at this node here
then in the continuation game
player 2 would know that this is the
right note this is information that
player 2 doesn't have
if we want to start let's say the game
at the entire information set
then
in the continuation game player 2 lacks
information that they have in the entire
game namely what are the relative
probabilities of these two notes right
in the entire game player 2 can deduce
this from player one's strategy but if
we were to look at a sub game starting
from here then this information player
two doesn't have
and this is something that we will
extend in
two or three weeks from now
all right now we can define
the backward induction solution
it's a strategy profile
so that
at every node
the players choose the action that
maximizes their expected utility if they
take into account how players act
optimally in the future
we say that the game is solvable by
backward induction if there is a unique
strategy profile that
survives backward induction
and
the only assumptions that we need on
the player's
knowledge or conjectures are common
knowledge of rationality because we've
assumed that extensive form games are
finite um
common knowledge of rationality is
enough
um to get to the beginning of the tree
what can we say about backward induction
as a solution concept
well it's actually a very nice solution
concept
because those extensive form games are
finite
every tree has at least one backward
induction solution
and
if no two terminal nodes award the same
payoffs to any player
then there's unique backward induction
solution and the outcome is also robust
and
this condition here that no two terminal
nodes award the same payoffs to any
player this is
satisfied generically so
for almost every choice of terminal
payoffs this is satisfied so it's a
really very nice solution concept
the drawback of it is that we cannot
apply it if
there is a non-singleton information set
in the in the tree and they aren't
really all that many applications where
players have perfect information
so what kind of applications do we have
so the first application
that where we see subgame perfect uh
backward induction studied quite
frequently is in a lab let's say if you
go to joseph slab then i'm sure that
there will be some experiments that test
backward induction or sub game
perfection
now one famous game
studied in the lab is the centipede game
where
two players can choose iteratively
whether they want to stop the game and
collect the payoff or they can continue
the game
and the payoffs are chosen such that
continuing the game
leads to overall higher payoffs
so at the very end the sum of payoffs is
maximized
but they are also chosen such that
by backward induction
there's always an incentive to stop
earlier so at the last node player two
should choose to stop so they can get
one payoff unit more
which implies that player one should
stop
at the second last node because they get
one payoff in it more than here
and so on and so the unique backward
induction solution stops at every node
the reason why this is famous
our famous example is because
in the lab we see very different
predictions in the lab we don't see that
players choose the backward induction
solution
and this has
led to
the development of different areas in
game theory
one of them is behavioral game theory
which
studies departures from expected utility
to kind of justify
or rationalize the behavior of people in
the lab
and then reputation models were actually
first first defined
to precisely deal with this centipede
game
and they are able to replicate this kind
of behavior by introducing uncertainty
of players about each other and so
this shows that for the backward
induction common knowledge of
rationality
is
even though this is sufficient and this
is good compared to other equilibrium
concepts it is still
a very strong assumption that players
know everything about the game and each
other
and so if we relax this in in a
certain way then we can get
cooperative behavior up to a certain
point
another application of backward
induction is
battling procrastination um
yeah if we
procrastinate i'm not sure if you'd have
that but if i
procrastinate then
that means that
i value today's utility more than i
value tomorrow's
and this means that today i want to do
something that is fun because i value it
more than i would tomorrow
and i want to defer all the costly
activities into the future
now if i'm aware that have that i have a
procrastination problem then
i will solve a
a dynamic game against my future self
and this is an application where
information is indeed perfect because we
observe our own past behavior and
it seems that backward induction
solution is justified
now let's see
what kind of setting we should choose to
capture these time inconsistent
preferences
so first
we need to
have a dynamic decision problem of a
single decision maker
there's
t dates at which we choose an action for
which we get an instantaneous payoff ut
and
what we're trying to maximize is the
discounted expected future payoff and
typically
the standard rate to discount future
payoffs is using exponential discounting
and this means that
we
discount
um
we have a one period discount factor
with which we multiply each future
periods to get the net present value of
future um
future cash flows
so it is the net present value of this
cash flow stream
now a different way to
discount the future is hyperbolic
discounting and this is what introduces
a present bias
so hyperbolic discounting is almost like
exponential discounting
except that
everything except today
we
discount additionally with a discount
factor smaller than one
so this means that we value
today more
than
proportionally more than we did in
exponential discounting
to see
why this means that we have time in
consistent preferences let's try to
think about what time consistent
preferences are
so
discounting introduces a
time preference because it tells us
how much we value payoffs in different
periods
and if
preferences are consistent this means
that the relative weights over future
periods will be the same so in this
graph here if we look at some future
time s
then if the relative weights stay the
same
this means that if we rescale
the weights that we had in the beginning
so that right now it's one then this is
the same
shifted by
time s
and so if those functions look exactly
the same except that they are shifted
then
arm preferences are time consistent
suppose that
this
discounting function f
um
or is given by f what condition does it
have to satisfy to be time consistent
well let's see okay so here at time t we
rescaled it um
by
f of s so that it's one and then what we
wanted is that we get exactly the same
except it's shifted by
as states
and this functional form is precisely
what defines the exponential function
so the only time consistent
discounting or time of system
preferences is exponential discounting
and so any other weighting of future
payoffs introduces some inconsistency
and this is the case for the hyperbolic
discounting
let's look at an example a numeric
example we have
two students who both have an assignment
due in four days
now the problem is that on each of the
days before that day before the
assignment is due
they have some event going on
to which they could go and they get a
positive utility for going to each event
and
they get a negative utility if they
don't hand in the assignment at all
and so at each date they have to decide
do they solve
the assignment do they write the
homework or do they procrastinate and go
to these events
i will assume that
constantine has time consistent
preferences
and sophie has time inconsistent
but sophie is sophisticated in the sense
that she knows she has time inconsistent
preferences she knows that she has
commitment problems she knows that she
is prone to procrastination
and and yeah so let's see
how we can solve this using backward
induction
the first thing to note is that
if we write the homework let's say on
the first day then we can go to all the
future events
and we don't get the negative utility
because we hand in the homework in time
and so we see that no matter on which
day we solve it
we get the utility of all
the events except for the day on which
we solve it and so we can just
write utilities as
the total utilities as -3 if we solve it
on the first minus five if we solve on
the second day and so on because those
are simply the utilities that we're
missing out
so
with time consistent preferences this is
really easy
um
especially if we choose delta equal to
one to make the to make the math
somewhat simpler
then well constantine knows
that have time to system preferences so
at any point in time they know okay here
um
i will lose three payoff units here five
eight 13 for solving it and clearly
backward induction tells us we should
solve it immediately because the events
get more valuable as we go on
now for sophie it's a little bit
different
sophie's preferences over time change
and we can write this as
a game of sophie with three of her
future selves
to understand how this tree was
constructed let's start here in the
beginning and in the beginning
the cost of solving the assignment is
three
then
the future the entire future is
discounted
by
one half
right beta is one half here and so
sophie
at the beginning
will think that okay solving the
assignment on the second day
costs only two and a half payoff units
but on the second day sophie will think
it costs five so this is how the payoffs
here are understood that
the first one is
the payoff for sophie perceived as from
day one
the second one as perceived from day two
and so on
now the reason why i write dots here is
because
sophie from
time three cannot
possibly
get a payoff when the assignment is
solved on time one because then sophie
at time three does not even play
and so yeah we can fill in all these
utilities here
and
we can solve it now through backward
induction that
the last sophie will choose to
solve the assignment
because -13 is better than minus 20.
then
second last sophie will see that okay
she knows she will solve the assignment
artists should be a minus eight here she
knows she will solve the assignment next
time so she can procrastinate now
then you go back
the previous sophie
knows that okay if i procrastinate now i
will procrastinate even more and that's
too costly because minus 6.5 is worse
than
minus 2.5 so
n minus 5.
so
she will choose to work and then
sophie in the beginning knows all i
won't procrastinate for too long so
she will procrastinate for one period
and then future so if you will solve it
so this is a nice somewhat non-standard
application of
backward induction
another application of backward
induction that is frequently studied is
bargaining there are many situations in
which two players bargain about
um
some outcome um
negotiations of contracts if you
negotiate a race with your employer or a
labor union wants to renegotiate a
better contract for their members we
have political or legal negotiations but
what all of these negotiations have in
common all these bargaining situations
is that the players negotiate
how the division of some surplus
or how the some surplus is divided
amongst them
and
a standard way to write down a marketing
problem has to become that
the players haggle over the share of a
pie that they get and the pie represents
the social surplus
the thing is that pi doesn't stay here
forever it deteriorates over time
which is captured by the discounting by
the players and here players are have
time consistent preferences
now how can we
formulate this as an extensive form game
well
at each so
the two players they can make
alternating offers and player one will
start making an offer and can propose
how to split the pie which means that
whoever makes the offer will get
share x and then the other player will
get share one minus x
and the other player can respond to this
offer and either accept it in which case
the pie is split in the proposed way or
they can
reject the offer and then make a counter
offer the problem is the counter offer
will be in the next period when the
total pie is not worth as much anymore
as it was in the previous period because
players discount the future
and
yeah if this bargaining game is finite
then we can solve it by backward
induction and probably you will do it in
one of the assignments
git
as a summary backward induction is a
very very nice solution concept that
expresses that players are forward
looking
and use knowledge of rationality to
to take into account what other players
will be doing
the problem is that there aren't really
that many applications
in which we have perfect information and
three of them we've seen in this video
now only one question or i guess two
solve those games with backward
induction
that's it for this video
the literature hasn't changed much i
guess there's some bargaining um
literature
by stahl and rubenstein
and it's also discussed in today's
good that's it for this video and i'll
see you in the next one